Genome graphs have emerged as a powerful framework for the discovery and genotyping, especially notable with respect of complex regions and structural variations in large cohorts, however, their widespread adoption remains limited by a lack of well-established and user-friendly tools and pipelines for applying genome graph approaches. 

In the following, we present results from part "B" of the project "GraphGenomes", whose aim is to unlock the potential of graph-based genome analysis based on short read data, the most widely employed sequencing technology, for a broad user base. Our work comprises the following components: (i) Standardized workflow development for reference graphs construction and maintenance; (ii) Pipeline development for performance evaluation of diverse state-of-the-art graph-based genome inference approaches; (iii) Integration into the German bioinformatics infrastructure (deNBI). 

We reached milestone (i) by adapting the NovoGraph algorithm to a newer version the Nextflow workflow. 

We achieved milestone (ii) by developing a reproducible Snakemake pipeline that downloads locally the necessary input data, applies three graph-based genome inference algorithms, and assesses performance of genotyped results depending on four metrics and two regions. In particular, reference genome graphs and short read data are downloaded from “Human Genome Structural Variation Consortium” (HGSVC) and “Genome In A Bottle” (GIAB) consortium, respectively.  The applied algorithms fall into the following two categories: kmer-based and mapped-based approaches. PanGenie and BayesTyper correspond to the former, whereas GraphTyper appertains to the latter. Employed metrics consist of weighted genotype concordance, precision, recall and F-score. The genomic regions include repetitive and non-repetitive. Furthermore, evaluation outcomes show analogous results for both regions, being overall lower in repetitive regions, though. Regarding concordance, Pangenie outperforms GraphTyper for all variant sizes and genotypes a much larger fraction of variants not typable by BayesTyper, while achieving similar performance. In F-score terms, PanGenie outperforms both methods, notably pronounced in large variants (>= 50bp), thanks to its high recall besides the significantly good precision achieved. 

Finally, for milestone (iii), we orchestrated the deployment and configuration of bioinformatics software within deNBI based on an Ansible playbook that installs in an automatic and coordinated way extensively used pangenomics packages for direct execution inside provisioned virtual machines by the deNBI cloud infrastructure. Additionally, the implemented workflows and pipelines are thoroughly tested inside the deNBI resources and made open-source available to further stimulate community uptake.

Our work therefore accounts for reproducibility of experiments, reduced technical hurdles and computational constraints to democratize the use of graph genome solutions for the whole community leveraging expertise level and computational resources.


